README.md, before:

# DPFS - **D**PU-**P**owered **F**ile **S**ystem Virtualization framework
The DPFS framework allows Cloud and datacenter operators to provide virtualized file system services to tenants using DPU-offloading.
With DPFS the complete file system implementation runs on the CPU complex of the DPU. Tenants consume the file system through the `virtio-fs` device that the DPU exposes over PCIe (multi-tenancy via SR-IOV).
* `dpfs_fuse` - The framework exposes a feature complete implementation of the lowlevel libfuse API to support existing userspace file system implementations (not a drop-in replacement but very similar).
* `dpfs_nfs` - This file system implementation runs on the DPU connects to a remote NFS server, providing its file system to the host.
* `dpfs_kv` - Connects to a remote RAMCloud cluster via RDMA to provide a flat file system optimized for low latency 4k I/O

# Design and implementation
![DPU virtio-fs architecture diagram](arch.png "DPFS architecture diagram")
## Modules
### `dpfs_hal`
Front-end and hardware abstraction layer for the virtio-fs emulation layer of the DPU hardware. Currently only supports Nvidia SNAP with the Nvidia BlueField-2.
Nvidia SNAP is a closed source project
### `dpfs_fuse`
Provides a lowlevel FUSE API (close-ish compatible fork of `libfuse/fuse_lowlevel.h`) over the raw buffers that DPUlib provides the user, using `dpfs_hal`. If you are building a DPU file system, use this library.
### `dpfs_aio`
Reflects a local filesystem via the POSIX FS API by implementing the lowlevel FUSE API in `dpfs_fuse`, with asynchronous or synchronous reads and writes (asynchronous version uses libaio). Basic use of the operations works.
This implemention is currently unmaintained. Ever since the `dpfs_hal` api has changed with the `dpfs_nfs` development, this implementation is broken. It's performance is quite terrible for metadata workloads as all metadata operations are synchronous. A performant implementation using io_uring (as [it supports async metadata operations](https://github.com/axboe/liburing/blob/8699273dee7b7f736144e2554bc32746f626f786/src/include/liburing/io_uring.h#L177)) is in the pipelinez.
### `dpfs_nfs`
Reflects a NFS folder with the asynchronous userspace NFS library `libnfs` by implementing the lowlevel FUSE API in `dpfs_hal`. The full NFS connect handshake (RPC connect, setting clientid and resolving the filehandle of the export path) is currently implemented asynchronously, so wait for `dpfs_fuse` to report that the handshake is done before starting a workload!
### `dpfs_kv`
Reflects the contents of a RAMCloud cluster as a flat root directory to the host machine. The key is the name of the file in the root directory and the value is the contents (4k max file size) of the file. This backend is optimized for low latency for many small files through RDMA.

The NFS server needs to support NFS 4.1 or greater!
Since the current release version of `libnfs` does not fully implement NFS 4.1 yet (+ no polling timeout), [this new version of `libnfs`](https://github.com/sahlberg/libnfs/commit/7e91d041c74ee33f48fc81465aa97d6610772890) is needed, which implements the missing functionality we need.
### `list_emulation_managers`
Standalone program to find out which RDMA devices have emulation capabilities

# Usage
The Nvidia SNAP library that is needed to run on BlueField-2 (only DPU currently supported) is closed source and does require a patch to enable asynchronous request completion.
Using `virtio-fs` in SNAP is currently only possible with a special limited technical feature preview firmware. You can reach out to us on how to integrate DPFS and SNAP.

With the above in mind, the rough steps needed to run DPFS on the BlueField-2:
* Patch SNAP to support asynchronous completion of virtio-fs requests (needs to be concurrency-safe)
* Integrate DPFS into the build system of SNAP
* Enable virtio-fs emulation in the DPU firmware with atleast one physical function (PF) for virtio-fs, and reboot the DPU
* Determine the RDMA device that has virtio-fs emulation capabilities by running `list_emulation_managers`
* Use `dpfs_nfs` or `dpfs_kv` by configuring DPFS through the toml configuration file (see `conf_example.toml`)

# Project status
See the Github issues and milestones.

# FAQ
## What is a 'DPU'?
A DPU (Data Processing Unit), for the scope and definition of this project, contains a CPU (running e.g. Linux), NIC and programmable data acceleration engines. It is also commonly referred to as SmartNIC or IPU (Infrastructure Processing Unit).

DPUs are shaping up to be(come) the center of virtualization in the Cloud. By offloading cloud operator services such as storage, networking and cloud orchestration to the DPU,
the load on the host CPU is reduced, cloud operators have more control over their services (for upgrades and performance optimizations) and bare metal tenants are easier to support.

## What is `virtio-fs`?
[Virtio](https://developer.ibm.com/articles/l-virtio) is an abstraction layer for virtualized environments to expose virtual PCIe hardware to guest VMs.
[Virtio-fs](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/virtiofs.html) is one of these virtual PCIe hardware specifications.
It employs the [FUSE](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/fuse.html) protocol (only the communication protocol!) to provide a filesystem to guest VMs.
There are now DPUs comming out on the market that have support for hardware-accelerated virtio-fs emulation. Thereby having a real hardware device implement the virtual filesystem layer of virtio.
We are using the Nvidia BlueField-2 which has support for virtio-fs emulation using Nvidia SNAP (Currently only available as a limited technical feature preview).

## :switzerland: Hybrid Cloud / Infrastructure Software group at IBM Research Zurich
For contact about DPFS and the research we are conducting please reach out to: Peter.Jan.Gootzen @t ibm d0t c0m. If you are a DPU-vendor looking into support file system offloading on your DPU, we would be happy to help with porting DPFS to your hardware.

Commit message:

More BF2 prototype firmware info

README.md, after:

# DPFS - **D**PU-**P**owered **F**ile **S**ystem Virtualization framework
The DPFS framework allows Cloud and datacenter operators to provide virtualized file system services to tenants using DPU-offloading.
With DPFS the complete file system implementation runs on the CPU complex of the DPU. Tenants consume the file system through the `virtio-fs` device that the DPU exposes over PCIe (multi-tenancy via SR-IOV).
* `dpfs_fuse` - The framework exposes a feature complete implementation of the lowlevel libfuse API to support existing userspace file system implementations (not a drop-in replacement but very similar).
* `dpfs_nfs` - This file system implementation runs on the DPU connects to a remote NFS server, providing its file system to the host.
* `dpfs_kv` - Connects to a remote RAMCloud cluster via RDMA to provide a flat file system optimized for low latency 4k I/O

# Design and implementation
![DPU virtio-fs architecture diagram](arch.png "DPFS architecture diagram")
## Modules
### `dpfs_hal`
Front-end and hardware abstraction layer for the virtio-fs emulation layer of the DPU hardware. Currently only the Nvidia BlueField-2, support for other vendors is in the works. We have worked together with other DPU vendors to make sure our framework architecture/API is compatible with future virtio-fs support for other DPUs.
The Nvidia SNAP library is closed source and does require some patching to fully expose the functionality needed for a DPU-powered file system implementation. We cannot publicly release these patches, but if you have access to Nvidia SNAP you can reach out to us for the patches.
### `dpfs_fuse`
Provides a lowlevel FUSE API (close-ish compatible fork of `libfuse/fuse_lowlevel.h`) over the raw buffers that DPUlib provides the user, using `dpfs_hal`. If you are building a DPU file system, use this library.
### `dpfs_aio`
Reflects a local filesystem via the POSIX FS API by implementing the lowlevel FUSE API in `dpfs_fuse`, with asynchronous or synchronous reads and writes (asynchronous version uses libaio). Basic use of the operations works.
This implemention is currently unmaintained. Ever since the `dpfs_hal` api has changed with the `dpfs_nfs` development, this implementation is broken. It's performance is quite terrible for metadata workloads as all metadata operations are synchronous. A performant implementation using io_uring (as [it supports async metadata operations](https://github.com/axboe/liburing/blob/8699273dee7b7f736144e2554bc32746f626f786/src/include/liburing/io_uring.h#L177)) is in the pipelinez.
### `dpfs_nfs`
Reflects a NFS folder with the asynchronous userspace NFS library `libnfs` by implementing the lowlevel FUSE API in `dpfs_hal`. The full NFS connect handshake (RPC connect, setting clientid and resolving the filehandle of the export path) is currently implemented asynchronously, so wait for `dpfs_fuse` to report that the handshake is done before starting a workload!
### `dpfs_kv`
Reflects the contents of a RAMCloud cluster as a flat root directory to the host machine. The key is the name of the file in the root directory and the value is the contents (4k max file size) of the file. This backend is optimized for low latency for many small files through RDMA.

The NFS server needs to support NFS 4.1 or greater!
Since the current release version of `libnfs` does not fully implement NFS 4.1 yet (+ no polling timeout), [this new version of `libnfs`](https://github.com/sahlberg/libnfs/commit/7e91d041c74ee33f48fc81465aa97d6610772890) is needed, which implements the missing functionality we need.
### `list_emulation_managers`
Standalone program to find out which RDMA devices have emulation capabilities

# Usage
The Nvidia SNAP library that is needed to run on BlueField-2 (only DPU currently supported) is closed source and does require a patch to enable asynchronous request completion.
Using `virtio-fs` in SNAP is currently only possible with a prototype firmware and some alterations to the SNAP library. You can reach out to us on how to integrate DPFS and SNAP.

With the above in mind, the rough steps needed to run DPFS on the BlueField-2:
* Patch SNAP to support asynchronous completion of virtio-fs requests (needs to be concurrency-safe)
* Integrate DPFS into the build system of SNAP
* Enable virtio-fs emulation in the DPU firmware with atleast one physical function (PF) for virtio-fs, and reboot the DPU
* Determine the RDMA device that has virtio-fs emulation capabilities by running `list_emulation_managers`
* Use `dpfs_nfs` or `dpfs_kv` by configuring DPFS through the toml configuration file (see `conf_example.toml`)

# Project status
See the Github issues and milestones.

# FAQ
## What is a 'DPU'?
A DPU (Data Processing Unit), for the scope and definition of this project, contains a CPU (running e.g. Linux), NIC and programmable data acceleration engines. It is also commonly referred to as SmartNIC or IPU (Infrastructure Processing Unit).

DPUs are shaping up to be(come) the center of virtualization in the Cloud. By offloading cloud operator services such as storage, networking and cloud orchestration to the DPU,
the load on the host CPU is reduced, cloud operators have more control over their services (for upgrades and performance optimizations) and bare metal tenants are easier to support.

## What is `virtio-fs`?
[Virtio](https://developer.ibm.com/articles/l-virtio) is an abstraction layer for virtualized environments to expose virtual PCIe hardware to guest VMs.
[Virtio-fs](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/virtiofs.html) is one of these virtual PCIe hardware specifications.
It employs the [FUSE](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/fuse.html) protocol (only the communication protocol!) to provide a filesystem to guest VMs.
There are now DPUs comming out on the market that have support for hardware-accelerated virtio-fs emulation. Thereby having a real hardware device implement the virtual filesystem layer of virtio.
We are using the Nvidia BlueField-2 which has support for virtio-fs emulation using Nvidia SNAP (Currently only available as a limited technical feature preview).

## :switzerland: Hybrid Cloud / Infrastructure Software group at IBM Research Zurich
For contact about DPFS and the research we are conducting please reach out to: Peter.Jan.Gootzen @t ibm d0t c0m. If you are a DPU-vendor looking into support file system offloading on your DPU, we would be happy to help with porting DPFS to your hardware.
